# Developer Relations

A lot has changed since I made
[this post on /r/cscareerquestions](https://www.reddit.com/r/cscareerquestions/comments/cu14jf/developer_evangelist_et_al/)
at the end of August 2019; in particular I've gotten two jobs in the field of developer relations and been fired from
one of them! I would say that my experiences have been somewhat specific, since both of my developer relations positions
have been with _open-source_, _startup_ companies in the _blockchain_ industry. Nonetheless, I've done a fair amount of
thinking about developer relations in the past several months that I thought would be valuable to share.

First of all, what is developer relations? From my point-of-view, **developer relations** refers to a type of _need_
that exists within companies that create products designed for developers. This is to say that developer relations is a
type of specialized _customer service_ - I cannot overemphasize how important this perspective is to my take on the
field of developer relations. People that work in the field of developer relations are often referred to as **developer
advocates**. These people must develop a high degree of _empathy_ with their developer-users, which often means that
they have previously worked as a developer themselves. I believe that most of the time, developer advocates should
advocate _on behalf of_ their developer-users, although occasionally developer advocates will advocate _to_ their
developer-users - I refer to this as **developer evangelism**. It may seem like a platitude, but the most effective form
of developer evangelism is a consistently customer service-driven approach to developer relations. The most important
metric to take into account when evaluating the success of a developer relations program is the quality of the
**developer experience**. A developer advocate must do _more_ than just help other developers solve their problems, they
must have a strong inherent desire to _delight_ their developer-users.

I described developer relations as a type of "specialized" customer service, but many (if not most) of the tenets of
successful developer relations are little more than good _old-fashioned_ customer service. This is true with respect to
the fact that one of the best ways to provide a good developer experience is by _anticipating the needs_ of the
developer-users. Developer advocates must understand the _personas_ that inform their group of developer-users (_Why_
are they using the product? What are their _goals_?) as well as the _user journeys_ that they take while working with
the product (How do they get started? What are the day-to-day ergonomics of working with the product like?). My
experience in the blockchain industry means that I have mostly been focused on the early stages of the journey of my
developer-users. In general, I think it's important to focus on the ways in which developer relations is similar to
other types of customer service, however one of the few ways that I believe it's important to distinguish developer
relations from other forms of customer service is the acknowledgement that there are truly no shortcuts when it comes to
developer relations. Developers tend to be highly educated, highly experienced, highly _critical_ users. In my
experience, the _only_ way to activate and engage developer-users is to _demonstrate_ an _ongoing_ commitment to
providing a good developer experience. This means making it easy to understand the problem that the product is solving,
providing clear instructions and templates to minimize time-to-effectiveness as well as guides that demonstrate
end-to-end usages of the product and the ways in which it can be customized, and supporting developers with actively
maintained Q & A channels. If _all_ of these things do not exist the first time that a developer evaluates the product,
it will be challenging to encourage them to invest their time and mind-share in the product.

When it comes to the open-source and blockchain software industries, one particularly important role of a developer
advocate is that of **community steward**. The open-source software community is a place where many developers spend
their free time, so it's important to make sure that the experience of engaging with these communities is welcoming,
engaging, and enjoyable. Blockchains are unique in that they require a vibrant community of users in order to securely
provide their core capabilities, which means that part of supporting the product is supporting the mechanisms by which
its users interact with one another. I'm inclined to believe that most successful developer advocates will seek out ways
to maximize their engagement with and contributions to their developer-user community. In the open-source world, this
begins with well-documented, well-maintained code repositories. As mentioned in the previous paragraph, it's important
for developer advocates to actively maintain support channels, but I believe that it's equally important to maintain
channels that allow developer-users to engage with one another for reasons beyond support - this means monitoring,
engaging with, and managing a liberal selection of communication platforms including chat and all manner of social
media. Finally, developer advocates should look for chances to foster innovation within their community of
developer-users, which often means planning, managing, and judging hackathons.

Although providing a good developer experience is a big responsibility, I would say that some of the greatest challenges
I have experienced in my relatively short career in developer relations have had to do with understanding and managing
the diverse organizations to which I am beholden within a company. Developer relations is a discipline that straddles
engineering, business development, and marketing, and an important part of a developer advocate's job is to drive
towards clarity with respect to expectations, goals, and metrics for measuring success. Based on what I've seen, heard,
and read it's common for developer advocates to feel like the engineering team does not take them seriously or value the
work they contribute, while marketing teams may feel like developer advocates are stepping on their toes or stymying
their efforts. As with most other challenges related to developer relations, I find that the best way to address these
challenges is by deferring to a genuine commitment to high-quality customer service. One of the ways that I really
enjoying with my coworkers is when I get a chance to help one of my less technical colleagues gain a better
understanding of our company's products and users.

If I had to quantify how I spend my time as a developer advocate, it would go something like this: 30% of my time is
spent creating content, such as documentation, tutorials, or code templates, 30% of my time is spent contributing to my
company's strategies, and 40% of my time is spent engaging directly with my developer-users.
